Focus on asking questions.
It's not a bad idea.
Welcome to Brian, the Governance
and Administration Committee and, uh, and to your team.
Uh, we do have a short amount of time with you today, uh,
to look, uh, at the Public Services
Commission year in review.
So, um, we'd like to invite you
to make a few opening comments if you could keep that
to under, uh, three minutes,
and then we'll get into questions from members Over to you.
Hi, good morning, and thank you.
The year to 30 June has been very busy, and the commission
and our role as supporting ministers
and chief executives across the public sector.
Looking back, there are probably four
things that I'd highlight.
One, we spent a lot of time progressing the operating model
that we believe appropriate for public sector.
Secondly, we've actively explored the role of digital
and AI and the way we work.
The third thing, uh, is the bargaining role
that we've taken on teachers, which reflects a change
in the delegations that have operated since the late 1990s.
And the fourth thing is really supporting committee
ministers on the changes to the Public Service Act.
So the commission itself is under surgical pressure.
Uh, FTE head count is slightly lower than it was at 2017
for our core business, but we continue to perform
and deliver to the best of our ability.
Very happy to take any questions. Thank you.
That the committee may have.
Thank you, uh, very much for that.
Uh, I just wanted to start, if, um, I may in your,
in your report at page 15, you note
that it's the first time since 1997
that you've retained the collective bargaining delegation.
Yes. In relation to a number of, um,
collective bargaining negotiations
that have been undertaken in the public service.
Uh, as part of that, uh, you've not only, uh,
been responsible for bargaining,
but you've also taken an active role in, um, as the kind
of substitute employer in those bargaining practices.
Uh, and that has recently, um,
resulted in some controversy over some
of the funding decisions that you've made in terms
of the strategic direction that you're taking, that,
that role of leading the bargaining in.
Uh, is there anything that, um, you wish to
explain or to the committee around some of those decisions,
specifically in relation to the, the ads
that you did publish, um, on Facebook in relation to
that bargaining role?
The background to the commissioner, taking the role,
the flex's strong desire
for fiscal management across the public sector,
and the best way to ensure that was direct involvement.
As I said earlier, that's, that's changed.
Um, the bargaining process has been
very challenging for all parties.
I'm not suggesting that we were without fault,
but we had a job to do,
and we did that to the best of our ability.
Um, the strengthened role in bargaining has taken a lot
of resource, but as part of that role, it was very important
to me and to the commission that we made sure
that the facts were made available.
Social media is a critical channel
by which people get their information these days.
And so it was entirely appropriate in our view
to participate in that.
But I acknowledge it was the first time
that we had done it in a bargaining context,
and there was a lot of public commentary,
which is why I initiated a review, um, immediately
after the event itself,
because I think it's important that we are both scrutinized
and that we learn, um, it is likely
that we will do this again.
And I wanted to make sure that we were as best
as we could be, but I acknowledge it was the first time.
And I also accept the public commentary.
Do you, uh, accept
that the Public Service Commission has a key role in
upholding public sector neutrality as one of the key, um,
pillars of our democracy in order to continue
with public confidence within the public service?
I do. I also think it's the role of the public service
to make sure that the right facts
are getting to the right people.
And I need to be able to take an active role in
that when I see those facts being misinterpreted
willingly or maliciously.
Do you think that some of the advertisements
that you published went a step further from simply providing
facts and actually providing, uh,
a perspective on the bargaining, um,
against the striking workers
and alongside, um, what would usually be the employer's role
and you accept that, that may have impacted on, uh,
the public's perception of your neutrality?
I don't accept that actually,
but it's why I have initiated review to make sure
that we do uphold the highest levels of integrity.
There's no question about the need for that
completely accepted,
but as I said, the bargaining has been fraught this year,
as has been very challenging.
It's been done in a very,
very constrained fiscal environment.
And from time to time, the information
that was coming from the people we were negotiating
with was not factual, and it was not accurate.
And that is actually unhelpful
to a broader functioning community.
Do you accept, though, that the role of, um, trade unions
and striking workers is not to, uh, not the same
as your role in upholding public sector neutrality?
And so that might be the reason for the difference in
what is appropriate for them may not be appropriate for you
as Public Service Commissioner?
I completely accept,
and I've said publicly that the unions have a role.
I'm not questioning their role at all.
I just, I, I, I'll move on from this shortly,
but I just wanted to give you the opportunity, um,
from your perspective, the consultation
that you undertook in relation to this particular
ad campaign with ministers
and minister's office, including the Minister
of the Public Service and the Prime Minister, do you, uh,
feel that you consulted them effectively
and that they were fully informed of the steps
that you were intending to take?
I think we were already on public record as saying
that we could have done better in keeping them informed.
They were decisions that I made.
We should have kept them more fully informed, and we didn't.
And so some of the ministers, ministers were,
as it were, caught short.
I've acknowledged that.
I'm not sure what all I can add to it,
but it would be part of the learnings is if we're going
to do this, the stakes were very high at the time,
and I regret that ministers weren't kept
as fully informed under the no
surprises as they should have been.
The auditor, uh, general has now said
that you were gonna undertake an external review
and that they'll be looking at that review.
Could you just, um, outline for the committee the steps
that, um, have, uh, resulted in that particular decision
and what, what, what we can expect to see in terms
of reporting, public reporting on that review?
I mean, from my perspective, as I said earlier,
I thought it was really important given
that it was the first time,
and there's some learnings here, that we reviewed ourselves
to make sure that we were at the standards
that we would legitimately expect a remain of that view.
That work is underway, it has commenced,
and when it's completed, I would hope to make that
as available as I can, that I,
I have got nothing to hide here.
It's a very transparent process that Audit General
has confidence in our ability to do that.
He, he is reserved to write,
which I think is entirely legitimate to do further work.
If he doesn't think we're up
to the standard, he would require
This f Final question
from me, and then I've gotta start from Tim.
The, if this external review indicates
that the Public Service Commission did cross a line in
publishing ads that essentially attacked
to a certain extent the actions of striking workers, is
that something that you will take into account
and choose not to do in the future if it, if it is deemed
that that wasn't an inappropriate step?
Absolutely. That's at the heart of the learning.
There's no point in doing it
unless you're able to listen to the conclusions
and adapt your behaviors for the future.
That's the essence of what I'm trying to do here. Yeah.
So when you said earlier, you may do it again,
that's dependent on the external review.
Yes. But whether we like it
or not, social media is a fundamental channel
through which people obtain information.
We have to participate,
but we recognize that there are standards of
that participation and we need
to make sure we haven't breached.
Thank you. Yeah.
I was just a, a couple of questions back.
When we are talking about, I guess,
how you negotiate within one particular case, the PPTA, um,
when there are reports that they weren't putting the initial
offer to their members, um, that
not all members were given the, the chance
to vote on an actual often
before industrial election, is, is that a reason
that you might need to go directly
through channels like social media in this instance, that,
you know, if, if one side is playing those kind of games
and potentially breaking the law, do, do you need
the ability to communicate directly?
I'm of the view that we do need to, we need to make sure
that what we have been offering was made available
to the members of the union.
If the executive of that union chose not to do it,
that doesn't mean that we should just sit there passively.
And so we worked very, very hard.
The team worked very, very hard with PPTA,
I was personally involved.
I've got very clear recollection, recollection of
what was said and what was agreed to
Indeed, Uh, completely different area.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Um, thats Brian, one of the things
that you've, um, talked about in your, um, overview in your,
in the annual report is the whole thing about, uh,
siloed thinking, uh, in across the public sector.
Um, the one agency, which particularly has been set up
to try and bring some silos together in sort
of health welfare education area is
the social investment agency.
And I just want to, uh,
get your thoughts notwithstanding some challenges, Scott,
at the moment, um, but, uh, to get your thoughts on how
that work is progressing in terms of bringing together
multiple agencies effectively through that, uh,
multiple disciplines through that to try
and get better outcomes for people that need those outcomes.
Look, I'm very comfortable
with the progress Social investment agency.
It, it is a new way of doing business,
and it will add considerable value
to the New Zealand taxpayer.
So it makes a lot of sense,
but it is going to take some time
to completely change our model of operating.
But you, you raise the point of fragmentation,
fragmentation is a detriment
to the system is very expensive.
It gives rise to duplication,
and it doesn't always permit the public
servants to do their best.
So, social investment agency is part of a disruption factor.
I think it is net positive.
Um, and we've got some current issues that we're working
through, but that does not undermine
the intent of what they're doing.
So what do you see the future being
for the social investment agencies see?
Do you see it be becoming a bigger, uh, component of that,
of those, um, areas which are currently sitting in the,
the health, social development, um, uh, you know,
education et cetera areas,
and it taking a bigger role in those?
I I, I do. I mean, it, it will evolve, to be honest.
We haven't got a perfect answer to that.
But it, it is, it is a trial.
It is an experiment,
but it is clearly able to demonstrate significant value
to the impact of the people that we're seeking
to serve here, because it's actually not so much about
how the agency is.
It's is it making a difference in the lives of those
who are most vulnerable and in need.
And it is. And I think that's good.
Good. Excellent. Lawrence,
Thank you. Uh, I wanna
pick up on what, um, what you mentioned before.
Welcome, by the way, um, in terms of
providing the right information to,
when we're looking at collective bargaining,
I wanna pick up on the letter that you sent to NZDI, uh,
and this is on the 4th of September.
Why have you chose to misrepresent information
and budget in that letter when you said an extra
$2.5 billion funding education,
when the budget document itself actually does not state
that the budget itself states an extra $1.8 billion in
funding, not 2.5.
I also want to pick up on the fact that you said
that there's a nearly three quarters
of a billion dollars in learning support across staff,
when in fact it's $180 million.
When you do write letters like this to the union, do you get
that independently fact checked?
Of course I do. I would never knowingly mislead anyone in
the information I provide.
That's just an article of faith.
To me, those numbers have all been checked
by the Ministry of Education.
I acted in completely good faith on that.
I think the broader point trying to be made to the NZDI
and others was actually the investment in education is
significant and should be acknowledged.
How much of that extra three quarters of a billion dollars
that you have quoted is actually going to schools.
And the schools have control over
that rather than a centralized process,
which requires schools having to jump
through bureaucratic hurdles to get access
to the funding in the first place.
Because I think the thing is, you can represent the numbers,
but I also want to pick up on the fact that at $2.5 billion,
if you just even have a look at a summary
of initiatives on page 30,
it doesn't even say $2.50 on page 30
because you specifically said extra 2.5, it is 2.5,
but $800 million at our clawback
and our savings, that's not an extra.
So I understand that you are basing on the trust of
what Ministry of Education giving you,
but is there a process internally
or would you consider now having a process internally when
you do actually check some of the facts that figures?
We, we, we do.
Uh, I mean, a number of the questions you've asked, I,
I'm not in a position to answer,
but I can get them via the Ministry of Education.
I can certainly say we do have a process to check those
as checked by the Ministry of Education.
Those numbers came from the ministry.
Um, they have not been challenged by, by the union,
but as Brian said, that the point was to reflect
that there is significant investment
that has been made in this area.
And it was to address some of the concerns
that have been raised by the union
and bargaining about that investment.
Supplementary to, um, can I just check that based on,
this is the public service website,
and then we are looking at department agencies,
and particularly we are looking at chief executives
for remuneration that there is an automatic 2%
increase, including yourself.
Um, there's been a 2% increase in your
remuneration now at 401 K.
Do you see it ironic that you
and chief executives in general public service gets
independent remuneration authority
to look at the remuneration,
whereas we have seen support staff, for example,
has been in collective negotiation bargaining with you
for now coming up to 12 months.
Okay. Is that ironic?
Firstly, um, my remuneration will sit
by somebody completely outta my control.
Yep, exactly. So I'm not sure what I'm supposed
to do about that.
Precisely. The, the Heather might wanna comment on,
on the chief executors themselves,
but we, we are seeking to get a balance
between incentivizing and rewarding people.
Um, much of the bargaining that we have done, um,
has been at above 2% for teachers, for instance.
And that's a matter of public records.
So I'm not quite sure what, what,
Well, the question is things that were, that in terms
of remuneration for both yourself
and chief executives, like you said, are out of your control
because that done by independent authority.
The question then is then why
is the public service on public commission putting teachers
and nurses and doctors through this incredibly stressful
and un prolonged process?
And like I said, support staff have been negotiation for up
to 12 months now.
They started in December last year.
I think education support staff is being made
out of the Ministry of Education.
That's not bargaining being led by the commission.
But what I would add is that it's part
of a collective bargaining process.
This is the law. This is, this is the way that we need
to negotiate collective agreements.
It is something that we are required to do under the law.
It is not of our choosing of how we set remuneration.
It is actually, um, uh, you know, a process
that we must follow under the Employment Relations Act.
It's also perhaps worth noting that, um,
within the core public sector with the PSA,
we have sealed 36 agreements and we have about 10 left.
So it's, it, it's an unfortunate misrepresentation to think
that we are not actually making progress.
Because even in the teachers,
we have had the primary principals.
Mm-hmm. We've got the secondary principals
and we've just completed facilitation with PPTA.
So there has been quite considerable progress.
Mm. But up until then, what proportion, I mean, yes,
I think the number of, of 36
with only 10 remaining is significant.
But those 10 remaining are also substantial in terms
of the number of people they cover.
So while you're saying 36
and 10 remaining, what proportion of that, in terms
of actual number of people who are affected?
I don't know exactly how many,
but the nature of bargaining is actually,
it involves two parties.
We don't have automatic rights
unless we're gonna throw a whole lot of money.
And that's not something we're going to do.
We are looking for fear, equitable and affordable outcomes.
And we have achieved that in a number of cases.
But do you think that in this final, sorry.
Thank you chair. Um, do you think in this case
that in budget 2025, for example, we are currently,
when you are negotiating,
I understand the fiscal restraint that you are under.
However, what we've also seen, for example,
in budget 20 20 25 is a significant investment,
new investment of $9 billion into defense.
The total investment we're looking at into defense is
$10 million a day.
So while you are operating fiscal restrain,
and I understand, but have you also then considered
why are we squeezing and then making our teachers
and nurses and doctors and et cetera, having to settle
for less when there's other significant
investment in elsewhere?
Response, responsibility. That's the matters
that you raised matters.
They determine the apportionment across votes.
I work within the constraints of that I was working
and continue to work within a cabinet mandate and a purse.
That's how the system works.
Okay, Tom, Uh, good morning.
So Brian, in March of this year,
you ran the public service con, uh, census
and you went out to around 65,000 people
who work in the public service.
About 45,000 of them partake
and responded through the census.
One of the concerning parts
that came back from it was only 44% of people
who engaged in the census said they believed someone was
hired based on merit.
Meaning 56% of people
don't think people hired in the public service are based,
are hired on merit.
Um, can you give me sort of your analysis
of that initially, please?
Um, yes, it is quite concerning.
'cause as you know, um, merit based appointments is a really
important fundamental principle. Is
That the most important?
It's one of the top, um, priorities.
Um, and we have been considering very seriously
what else we can do to, um,
emphasize it is an important principle.
Um, I mean, there has been a lot of work in the space
to ensure, um, recruitment and promotion policies
and practices reflect those principles.
And there there is contestability, uh, in relation
to chief executive appointments.
Um, you'll be aware we have a quite a robust process there.
Um, part of the rationale behind the changes
to the Public Service Act, which removes the ability
for reappointment, was a perception of, um, questions
around the merit based nature of that.
And so we've adopted a practice in the meantime
that all chief executive appointments will be a contestable
process, not reappointments, uh, in preparation
for the act coming into place.
The only other exception is when a transfer is required, uh,
that's a transfer of a chief e from one role to the other.
Mm-hmm. Um, when we do that,
that's on a very exceptional circumstances.
And even then, we will run a merit based assessment
of their suitability to do the other job.
So more work for us to do, answering
what additional policy guidelines
that we can provide across the wider public
Sector. But there is
a concern that people believe that
because what they believe will,
will be the truth in their minds.
And what we, we have to do more to demonstrate
that there's never a question on the issue of merit.
Now, wouldn't it be the aim
of the, thank you for the answer.
Wouldn't it be the aim of the public service commission
to want to have 90, 95, a hundred percent of people
who work there thinking that people are hired based on merit
and not on any other external factor, eg.
Whether someone is hired based on their ethnicity, um,
their sexuality, their gender,
shouldn't it be the right person for the job,
the right role to lead that team?
Uh, absolutely everything should be based on merit.
And in particular for chief executive appointments,
that we are impartial
and they are not influenced in any political way.
Mm-hmm. Um, we have a positive duty to ensure that, um,
for all our roles in the sectors right,
through the whole of our workforce.
What can you do to lift that percentage for people?
So the people who work in the public service to say,
we've taken your concerns on board.
We are doing something about making sure it's merit based,
but we want to ensure that, you know,
that you've been listened to improve that perception around
that people are solely hired based on merit.
Uh, We, we have to stick to the standards
that we set for ourselves.
Yeah. And be very transparent about it.
We, we think it's corrosive
to the system if there is either any doubt.
Mm-hmm. We also think it's poor for the incumbent not
to have the confidence
that they were the best person for the job.
Agreed. So there's actually more than one factor
that we are playing into.
But I, you know, I'm not dismissing
that's how they feel.
That's what they think. We have to respond to it as we move
to a whole lot of the other matters.
In the survey, we have supplementary Lawrence.
Thank you. Um, it's good to hear that.
But in the latest census, for example,
that Asians now make up 70.2% of the population,
yet in tier one to three public service roles,
they make up less than 2%.
Then do you think that Asians do not have merit?
And are we planning on addressing that, that discrepancy?
Um, sure. We absolutely do not think that.
Um, we have a, um,
a clear diversity strategy across the public service
and we had, have, have had for a long time.
And that's focused on ensuring that we attract the diversity
of talent and retain them
and progress them through every level of the public service.
Um, and, and that we can ensure
that we are delivering high performing
public services as a result.
Um, our strategy particularly, um,
looks at valuing diversity of thought
and experience at all levels, um, attracting the widest pool
of candidates, and that includes into those senior roles,
um, and applying the merit principle comprehensively.
And we are working on
that at not only at the appointment stage,
but at every stage of the employment life cycle.
So, um, we are recognizing, we do recognize
that there is further work to do in a number of areas
to bring, um, you know, a broader set of applicants through.
Um, and that is a continued pro progress.
One more supplementary just on this.
In terms of lower tiered roles, we see
that there's a broader representation
of Asians in the public service, usually 10 plus percent,
but we do not see that progressing onto tier one
to three managers for a number of years.
So why it's having to say that there's a strategy,
but we're not seeing that happening in action. Why is that?
We have seen in recent years in our data
and in, um, an increase in younger, um,
public servants coming into the public service, which is one
of the reasons for that increase in, um, people in those,
um, lower and more entry level roles.
Um, we are working very hard with agencies to support people
to progress, um,
into those senior roles, but it does take time.
Can I just add to that, just in terms of the numbers,
but year on year over the last sort of almost 15 years,
we've seen a rep an increase each year in the number
of Asian representation in the public service.
At the moment, it's 16.5%, so it's quite high, high.
Um, and as you point out
with the new recruits coming into the public service,
that was 18.3% in the last year.
So we are seeing as, as a shifting demographic graphics
more coming through, and this is particularly pronounced in
Auckland, where Asian staff make up 30.7%
of our employees in 2025.
So as Alex has pointed out, as we see more recruits coming
through through, we expect over time they'll make their way
up into senior leadership roles.
And I think if I just add from the commission's
perspective, we are actively focused on
how we make the public service a genuine career option
for people who seek to serve general public.
And that is gonna require us
to think much more clearly about how,
how do we make this a career for people
that they benefit from.
And in doing so, they do, they contribute to New Zealand
because one of the very positive aspects of the census was
that people understand the purpose of their work.
That's a very important asset.
Thank you. Melissa. Just
A supplementary in relation
to the Asian population within the public service,
Asian pay gap is the largest
among ethnic pay gap at 13.8% in 2024.
Uh, do you think that's fair or is there a reason?
Is it because we have a young population
of public service? Yes. Who are starting
Primarily it is because the younger cohort are in those
more junior levels, um, junior level roles,
and that is what is contributing to that pay gap.
Um, it has decreased
to 13% from 13.8 in 2024, small reduction.
So we are seeing a little bit of movement there,
but primarily it is, it is where it is
because of the composition across,
um, those different roles.
Thank you. I just wanna, um, pick up a couple
of points in relation to, um, your annual report
and the commission's workload.
But just to, um, follow up from a comment that you made
before around consulting with ministers.
Uh, prior you said that you thought
that you could have done better consulting
with ministers in relation to the ads.
Um, uh, answer and answers to written question.
It appears that the draft media strategy, media statements,
social media tiles,
and an memoir received by the Prime Minister's office,
the Public Service Minister's office,
and the education minister's office
in advance of that strategy.
So what in addition to
that do you think the Public Service Commission could have
done to inform ministers? We should
Of the Process Highlighted.
Sorry. We
should have highlighted key factors.
And we didn't, we didn't, making a paper available
as part of a consultation.
I think there's also a professional obligation
to highlight issues which are new or sensitive,
and we failed to do that and we should have done better.
So just, um, linking that to, um, something
that you've put in your report.
Um, in your report you say that, uh,
the three intended performance improvement reviews were not
completed, um, this year due, um, to resources being,
uh, directed towards other priorities.
Uh, and the same time, um,
you've had an increase in head count.
So do you, do you have the ability
with the ministerial priorities,
and I'm happy for you to elucidate on
what those ministerial priorities are,
but with this bargaining work that you are taking on,
and with all this additional work that you, that you seem
to have, it seems that you're not being able
to fulfill the four functions
that the public Service commissioner, um, stated
that you would, um, like to be able to achieve.
So can you let us know, um, why, why that is the case?
Uh, relation to the chief executive performance
expectations and performance reviews?
Uh, we do everything we can to try and meet those targets,
but on occasion, we work precious demand.
We are not able to do so.
Um, and sometimes when we have acting chief executives, um,
it's more important we take the time
to be really clear about
what is required rather than meeting the specific deadline.
But absolutely, we didn't quite make that measure this year,
and we will be focusing on doing that next year.
Hmm. And so what were the, um, ministerial priorities
that took you away from doing that, that core part
of the Public Service Commission's work?
There's a, there's a range of things that keep us busy.
Um, I can't recall in the moment,
but there will be multiple things we're juggling
at, at any given time.
But in particular, the work, um, that, uh,
so Brian has mentioned around, um, the operating model,
uh, for the public sector.
That's been a big focus
for us at the Public Service Commission, um,
and giving advice our team, Melissa, about
how best to achieve that.
Just wanted to ask, um, uh, sir Brian,
you are the employer
or the chief executives within the public service,
and there's been some high profile integrity challenges
that have been noted, um,
during the past year in the public sector.
Um, how are you seeking to Dr.
Address this in terms of any changes to processes
or procedures to try
and ensure that these these
issues do not occur in the future? Heather,
Heather might wanna comment,
but, um, maintaining the integrity and the public trust
and confidence is very, very important to us.
We have had a wake up call, particularly if you're referring
to given McKim issue, that, as I've said publicly,
that was a wake up call.
We had it reviewed, there was suggestions made
to us about how we can improve.
We adopted those immediately,
and in fact, we've strengthened them.
And so, as I've also said publicly, we're gonna continue
to work sort of to the best of our ability
to make sure we are at international best practice,
because this is a rapidly moving, um, issue.
The, the nature of what people do in their private lives
and its impact on their ability to hold public office
is a serious issue for us.
It's a serious issue for New Zealand society, actually.
So I don't know whether you wanted to add anything.
I just, um, I might comment on the more broader point
about what we're doing around integrity
across the public sector.
My more recently, um, the public service code of conduct
was reissued, which sets out what those code, the code
and the expectations on all public servants are.
Um, we continue to have a, a, a stringent focus on this,
which is a key part of that is every agency ensuring
that they have key leaders, integrity champions, who ensure
that their agency are hearing to the standards
that are expected on them, um, right through to our
investigation and inquiry, um, duties.
So if there is a serious breach,
we expect every chief executive, for example,
the leaking off of, um,
or unauthorized disclosure of materials.
We expect chief executives to take that very seriously
and look into those matters immediately
and get to the bottom, not them.
And if something reaches a, um, significant threshold
where there has been a quite a serious breach
around integrity, then
of course the Public Service Commission has the ability
to do an inquiry.
And we do use that lever when that's necessary.
But we also, uh, on record integrity
as an idea is under challenge just generally.
So we are actually doing our best to strengthen
our guidance and our rules.
So it is very clear we're also introducing more education
of public servants around what they should be doing.
And we want keep that very current.
So this, as I said earlier, it's, it's an evolving,
it's an evolving theme at the moment for us,
and one that we need to get ahead
of if we're going to be successful. Uh, Andy?
Yeah. Yes, I do. Um, thanks.
But the, um, one of the things you talked about last time,
um, you were here was the, the essentially the size
as a whole, um, and the work that you were doing.
Then obviously there was some initial, um,
reductions in the head count.
Um, but when they, when this government came in, uh,
you indicated there was further work going on.
Um, I'm just interested to, to hear how that's progressing
and also how that relates to,
and I, I remember you, you talked about AI as, as part of
that, you've also talked again today about the
breaking down the silos and trying
to make the system more efficient
because it's not, not efficient at the moment.
So how that improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of public sector is going
and what that means for, uh, the number
of people that we need to do the job.
We don't have a targeted headcount number. That's fine.
We, we do have a target about improving the
efficiency and effectiveness mm-hmm.
Of the public sector. Um, I have spoken
and worked extensively
with the chief executives this year over, you know,
how do we get a model that's better fit for the future
and better serves the people that we're seeking to serve?
There's a view, um, that there are too many agencies, some
of them are below critical mass and
therefore aren't providing the career options
or resilience that we would expect.
So there's still too much duplication in some areas.
We believe that we could actually maintain the same level
of services, but with less entities.
And that's the hypothesis
that we are now actively exploring.
We've, we are doing the work,
ultimately this will be a matter for ministers to determine.
We don't have that. But we believe that the model
that we've had, which has been hardwired, uh, into silos
for the best part of 40 years is
no longer fit for the future.
We think there is merit in exploring
how we could change that.
What's the role of digital? What's the role of ai?
How are we going to respond to the fiscal pressures?
And as I said earlier, more importantly,
how are we gonna maintain the, the human capital
and make that a real asset for us?
Because it is a real asset
and the census has proved that the quality of our people
is very, very good
and we need to have that further enhanced and respected.
So you're making progress in terms
of thinking about the right structure and,
and, um, trying to reduce duplication.
Do you have a sort of timeframe of which we are likely
to see some of those thoughts, um, come to,
uh, come to everybody's attention?
I think maybe in the next 12 months.
But what whatever we do has
to be done in a way we will maintain business as usual.
Yeah. So we don't wanna buy a sale,
but I do think if we could agree a strategy
and say over the next three to five years
as investment choices have to be made
or employment choices have to be made,
let's think about whether we've got the, the correct model.
Thank you Francis. Uh, thank you Chair.
Uh, one of the things that, uh, you referred
to in your previous answer was the need for public servants
to respect, uh, political neutrality.
But the counter side to that is that ministers also have
to respect the political neutrality of the public service.
We've seen several examples over the past term of
ministers potentially overstepping boundaries,
issuing operational level, um, guidance.
Have you stepped in at any point over the past term to kind
of warn against that practice
or correct ministers
where they've potentially gone over the law?
I haven't been required to step in,
but if, if those matters were brought
to my attention, I would look at it.
I have had no personal experience, local interference
in the job that I'm doing.
So in your view, no minister has overstepped the line in
terms of public service neutrality over the last year
Since you I, I, I didn't say that.
Okay. I said I had not been required,
But have you seen exempts?
I have not seen that, but if you've seen it
and you refer that to me, I'm very open to looking at.
Thank you Melissa. Um,
Thank you. Uh, so
Brian, uh, I'm actually interested in the
commission's performance measures
and one of them that actually I'm looking at is the
performance improvement at systems oversight, where,
you know, there were supposed
to be three performance improvement reviews
for the financial year, but you've only done one,
but you've also done a rapid review of, um, why wasn't
that included in that report?
Uh, well that's where we diverted our resources too,
because it was a priority at the time.
It's not technically a full performance
improvement review. So you
Hadn't actually completed It.
We have completed that, right? Yes.
It just wasn't counted against our statistics.
Um, and the a further review, which is one for the treasury
was delayed to allow time for the new secretary
for the treasury to, um, get his feet under the table.
That's well advanced now.
And we have, um, a further several performance improvement
reviews underway, including
with New Zealand police supplementary Tom.
Okay. Do you have No, thank you.
Um, on performance, I think this time last year,
the government signaled, uh,
that they would be bringing in performance based pay
the chief executives.
Um, why did the commission not implement this in this year?
Despite also including it in the statement of performance?
Correct. I mean, it's a fair question.
Um, and it was a commitment, um,
the government made in the speech to the throne.
Um, we have done quite a lot of work on this
and, uh, we have given advice up to minister as to
how we could reflect or implement that, um, proposal.
Um, but we haven't not, we have not yet.
The time has not yet been right mm-hmm.
To do so, um, our focus has been on,
on other precinct, uh, priorities.
We do have to think about where our resources go
and in particular when we do implement it, we want
to ensure it's enduring fair, impactful,
and fiscally responsible.
What sort of, in light of that, what sort
of preparation have you undertaken to ensure
that it can be rolled out when the time is right?
Uh, we have consulted on a draft policy
with the chief executors.
We've identifies ways in which it could be implemented,
including, uh, alignment with the government's, um, targets.
Mm-hmm. And thinking about across the range of, uh,
chief executives that we have, they might have, you know,
quite a few different priorities with ministers.
I mean, I think the total is something like six
or 700 across the cohort.
Yeah. So working out how you could distill
for each portfolio
and each chief executive, what would be the
critical few priorities at which you could assess whether
or not performance pay would be warranted?
So it is quite an extensive exercise. Yeah.
Um, there's a lot of judgment clause in that.
So we've done the thinking, we've done the work.
Um, a lot of work.
It just hasn't been the right time to implement it.
Uh, it has to be done at the right time of year mm-hmm.
As we setting new expectations. Yeah.
That's coming up in next year.
Um, and we have to think about the fiscal impact as well.
So all of those dynamics have shifted over the course
of when, um, that commitment was made.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so we are not yet in a position
to be able to implement that.
Just one final summary. Um, there was
previously performance pay, which was reversed in correct?
2018. Yes.
What's to stop you from re-implementing what was previously?
Um, so the previous regime,
she executive had a base salary.
Mm-hmm. And then they're eligible for up
to 15% performance pay.
And on top of that, a 10% at risk.
Uh, so further 25% on top of, um, that got negotiated away.
'cause of course all two executives are on fixed term
individual employment agreements.
Yeah. So in order to negotiate that out, um,
adjustments were made to their full package.
In other words, they went back to their base salary,
but each chief executive got an extra one week annual leave.
So they have a total of five weeks annual leave, which is
becoming more commonplace, but they got negotiated in, um,
in order to change their contracts to reflect that we'd have
to renegotiate contract
By contract. Thank you. Thank
you.
Sorry, we've just got a few more questions. I can,
And, and so at risk that, um, losing some
of these salary is quite a big ask of chief executives.
It's complicated and we wouldn't want to negotiate some
and not the others and have, um, inequity.
Yeah. Across the chief executive cohort,
Just following up on the chief executive, um, pay, um,
we were told by the Minister of Health
that we should direct questions around the director general
of health's, um, payments to the Public Service Commission.
So the question is, can you confirm whether the
PCs listed 350,000 remuneration listed for the director
of General of Health
for 20 24 25 covers only the period from, um,
up to 21 February, 2025?
And if so, is that effectively equivalent to
around seven months salary?
I would need to check the exact detail to be accurate.
Very happy to come back to you on that.
Okay. So it, it seems that, that the question is really,
that seems like a large Yep.
Payment for a very small period of time.
And so is, were there any specific issues of concern
that led to the direct to general receiving payments
that are usually associated with the negotiated facilit?
Not that I'm aware of,
but as I said, I to do justice to the question,
I would actually have to go back.
Uh, my recollection is that was, uh,
we meet our contractual requirements
with the director general as we do
with any chief executive that departs.
They have a, they have a notice period.
And so we do have an obligation to pay out their notice
Period. So, but in
the documents listed, um,
on your website in relation to the director general, um,
seems to indicate that there was, uh, a payment of 350,000
for that short period of time.
Are you saying that that was purely a contractual payment?
Yes. Which includes a three month.
So there was no payment associated with a,
I'm just asking this question because it's a significant
amount of taxpayer money to go to an individual
for a short period of time.
So is is the answer that that was a,
that was just a contractual payment.
It wasn't a negotiated settlement,
it was a contractual payment associated
with the government's handling of that. Correct.
It was a contractual payment that was made and agreed.
Thank you. We've now run out of, uh, time,
um, for the hearing.
Thank you, uh, very much. Um, during us Good.